Annette LaFrance: To Jackson.
Annette LaFrance: Hello.
Annette LaFrance: I can hear you.
tracy jackson: Okay, how are you
Annette LaFrance: I'm okay.
tracy jackson: I have to warn you I am
tracy jackson: In Panama and my internet is
tracy jackson: Will sometimes seem completely fine. And then after 20 minutes we'll just drop off. So it's, it does this come back to the room and we can continue talking
tracy jackson: Okay, far, so good.
tracy jackson: Okay, awesome. The prefer to be called a net
Annette LaFrance: Yeah okay I'm Tracy Jackson. Nice to meet you.
tracy jackson: Virtually and before we get started, I was hoping you would just share with me something about yourself that has nothing to do with pain or medical visits or coronavirus just something about who you are, what you love, that kind of thing.
Annette LaFrance: Um, well.
Annette LaFrance: I
Annette LaFrance: Actually, I, I've been working from home for eight years. And I actually now I have a home office. So I'm just, that's what I've been focusing on this week is is kind of just to get my mind off of everything else is. Yay, I have a home office. So I work as a it architect for Oracle
Annette LaFrance: Large high tech company.
tracy jackson: Right, yeah.
Annette LaFrance: I I've worked for startups before and I've always had my whole career in
Annette LaFrance: In it.
Annette LaFrance: Okay.
tracy jackson: So in some ways, this, this kind of disruption has a little bit of a silver lining for you and that you've always been able to work from home and in a home office.
Annette LaFrance: Right for My work environment. It hasn't changed anything just we've been on lockdown here since the 16th.
Annette LaFrance: So,
Annette LaFrance: The Bay Area. Did it really early so
tracy jackson: It's a lot and and what are the things that you would say you value the most in your life, your greatest value.
Annette LaFrance: Um,
tracy jackson: Tiger is something very that came in the window that I know it's a mirror. I saw your hair and thought it was something peeping through the doorway.
Annette LaFrance: Now I've got a messy bond on
tracy jackson: Yeah. You want me back up here somewhere.
tracy jackson: Um, now you
Annette LaFrance: Um, I guess I've been just um
Annette LaFrance: I would say my health because it was
Annette LaFrance: Even though I'm still dealing with pain. It was a lot worse before. So at least I've gotten over the Lyme disease part and
Annette LaFrance: Excuse me. And so in that sense, things are better and
Annette LaFrance: I guess I value my marriage. I have a good marriage and a loving husband. I've been married for
Annette LaFrance: Four years now.
Annette LaFrance: And this is my second marriage so
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, and
Annette LaFrance: I guess I value my freedom.
Annette LaFrance: And I feel lucky that I can
Annette LaFrance: Live where I do and
tracy jackson: Okay.
tracy jackson: Quite a few things that are
tracy jackson: Easy to be thankful for the support the location freedom and
tracy jackson: You're improving health. Yeah. Okay. And what would you say are your greatest strength with things. You're the best at being are doing
Annette LaFrance: I'm
Annette LaFrance: Sorry, I think I'm having a hot flash
tracy jackson: Can be hard.
Annette LaFrance: I think
I think
Annette LaFrance: I have a creative mind.
Annette LaFrance: I think I have
Annette LaFrance: A way of looking at things that I can see the big picture and not a lot of people who can do that from my experience, they tend to get stuck on details or little aspects of things and
Annette LaFrance: I can usually see the big picture. I think I'm a generous person.
Annette LaFrance: I think I'm always there to lend a hand and listen to people and be a friend. And so, um, yeah.
tracy jackson: Dinner six pictures and thank you for sharing all that with me sort of awkward no to come right into a conversation and then boom, just peppered with questions.
tracy jackson: And I will tell you a little bit about myself and why I'm here at bright heart and and before I do that, I'm just interested in what you're hoping to get out of this next 40 minutes or whatever that we have together today.
Annette LaFrance: I'm
Annette LaFrance: I'm, I'm not. I'm confused about the whole program. I'm not too sure who does what
Annette LaFrance: And I know there's group meetings and there's individual meetings. And then there's a doctor and and there's like different people and I'm
Annette LaFrance: I am a little confused.
Annette LaFrance: About what everybody does. And like, it seems like I get bits and pieces of information.
Annette LaFrance: Like, then you had two weeks ago, I was told during the group meeting.
Annette LaFrance: Yes, so make an appointment with Dr. Jackson, and I'm like, Okay, who's that what for, and then I forgot about it after. And then I came to say, I think I have group meeting this week. And then they said, Well, no, you can't come in because you haven't talked to Dr. Jackson.
tracy jackson: Um,
Annette LaFrance: I must have missed something somewhere because I'm confused.
tracy jackson: Now right and tell me what tell me what your needs are from bright heart. What do you need from bright heart as a whole sort of big picture and then what is it that you hope to get from the interaction with me.
Annette LaFrance: My dealings with pain have been a long, long process.
Annette LaFrance: I'm sorry I didn't sleep much
Annette LaFrance: I've been
Annette LaFrance: I never thought I'd end up in this situation, I feel like I've been
Annette LaFrance: maligned by this
Annette LaFrance: pain management clinic industry.
Annette LaFrance: That
Annette LaFrance: I went into it. Not really. I'm not talking about bright heart.
Annette LaFrance: When I was transferred to a pain clinic.
Annette LaFrance: Last year last year year before.
Annette LaFrance: I was still had the pic line and so is in 2018
Annette LaFrance: I no idea what I was getting into. And
Annette LaFrance: I was given a lot of medication.
Annette LaFrance: That
Annette LaFrance: In retrospect, I didn't know anything about pain management and in retrospect.
Annette LaFrance: I feel I was way too overmedicated and
Annette LaFrance: Or they could have tried other things before immediately putting me on oxycodone
Annette LaFrance: I think they could have tried other things and
Annette LaFrance: I didn't realize
Annette LaFrance: That my body would become dependent on them.
Annette LaFrance: And that it would make my pain worse.
Annette LaFrance: Um,
Annette LaFrance: I don't know.
Annette LaFrance: If there would have been another way to do that or have more information about
Annette LaFrance: The risks. I was obviously in a lot of pain. So I might have just said, I'll, I'll do anything. Just get rid of the pain. Um, it's, um, I'm just mad and I'm frustrated
tracy jackson: Very much is the trail when the system that you trusted to help you in fact ends up hurting me profoundly and in every aspect of your life.
tracy jackson: So to your story and stories, very much like you're
tracy jackson: A part of the reason that I'm a bright heart. I started out as an anesthesiologist, and therefore an interventional pain specialist at Vanderbilt.
tracy jackson: Putting needles in people. I trained at Stanford back in early 2000 where we would routinely give 800 milligrams of oxy cotton three times a day to people. Right. We thought that was what to do.
Annette LaFrance: That is crazy.
Annette LaFrance: Oh, wow.
tracy jackson: Lots and lots of medicine and and
tracy jackson: So I've been, you know, I went to Vanderbilt. And over time, I started to realize that my patients weren't getting better. I was doing everything I was taught my patients were getting worse.
tracy jackson: I didn't know why that was we're not trained how to do a lot of this in medical school.
tracy jackson: And I went to what I thought was some good one. So I became a yoga instructor an acupuncturist to help coach. I've done a lot of different things, learning about the GI system and the gut brain connection to try to sort of figure out is there more holistic approach. And so, as you know,
tracy jackson: And every thing from
tracy jackson: Me lighters and right. This is a medicine to
tracy jackson: A rich, you know, take 12 of pain patients on a retreat in the middle of the woods for two weeks. But I'm not all one or the other. Right, so
tracy jackson: I recognize there's validity and a little bit of all of it and that there are 100 ways to cook rice and so part of the
tracy jackson: Way reason for these one on one meetings before the group is that in the group. We will talk about
tracy jackson: The different strategies to manage pain it to be a safe space to be able to ask any questions that you want to the shame the judgment.
tracy jackson: Present different options. The science behind it, why it might work practical tool for it can work wherever you are, no matter how much money you have, or no matter where you live and
tracy jackson: That the stuff we do in the grits is not fast, right, it's not like a pill or procedures not fast and that they take time and not
tracy jackson: Everything will work for everybody in this situation so that I like to have these one on one meetings so that we can really get an idea of
tracy jackson: What drives you what what do you think's causing your pain. What you know give you a chance to be really seen and heard. And your pain experience. And then so that when we're in the groups that will be able to help cater some of these things to your specific needs.
Annette LaFrance: And that's something that
Annette LaFrance: At some point at the clinic, I went to a pain clinic in San Mateo. I think you're familiar must be familiar with the Bay Area, since you went to Stanford.
Annette LaFrance: And just like right away. They put me on Oxycodone and
Annette LaFrance: And then I was like, Why do I have to take these every day. Why can I just take them when I have pain. I don't have pain all the time. Why do I have to take these in. And at first, they said, Well, you have to get ahead of the pain.
Annette LaFrance: And then the doctor said, well, you will become physically dependent on these and I was a shock to me. And I'm like, well, that's not something that I want.
Annette LaFrance: But I end up being in a lot of pain and I was like I well I guess I'll follow what they say they know what they know what they're doing.
Annette LaFrance: And it won't be so bad.
Annette LaFrance: But then, you know, I'd pay $300 a month because they weren't in my network to go to these doctors and they'd spend five minutes and write me a prescription and then at one point I said, I just, I don't want to take these medications and
Annette LaFrance: And so the doctor said, Well, I don't agree because you have Lyme disease. So the pain is always going to come back, it's cyclical
Annette LaFrance: And so you're going to be in pain for the rest of your life. And so you should just stay on this. It's a low dose. He'll be fine. And like, no, because I made me tired and D motivated and I'm not interested in stuff around me and I just didn't like
Annette LaFrance: So at one point, I was like, I just really want to get off these and so they tried to sell me Ketamine infusions said maybe that that would get you off them, but they wanted 70 $500 for three infusions. I'm like,
Annette LaFrance: He says, well, people come for these are either like really wealthy or really desperate. He goes, You have to decide which category, you're in. Well, I said, I'm not really wealthy. So I guess I must be really desperate. But I was so mad after when I left.
Annette LaFrance: I was like, they just want money.
Annette LaFrance: So I said, screw them. I'm going to wean myself off these medications.
Annette LaFrance: So I got pretty far but at one point I hit a wall. I was in too much pain and I could just couldn't function.
Annette LaFrance: And so I started going to see different doctors
Annette LaFrance: I'm saying, Can you help me finish weaning off of these and try like, no, we don't do that. And I think after five doctors
Annette LaFrance: I found the addiction.
Annette LaFrance: Outline at my job and said, I need help somebody got to help me.
Annette LaFrance: And
Annette LaFrance: So they ended up transferring weeks, they're like well you you're not really, you know,
Annette LaFrance: It's you're not addicted. So you sent me to another, like an employee assistance program and they referred me to your clinic.
Annette LaFrance: And said that they you had a program for chronic pain patients.
Annette LaFrance: So, um,
Annette LaFrance: So that's how I ended up
So there's a
tracy jackson: Scene sounds like a really
tracy jackson: Traumatic
Experience.
tracy jackson: Quite a few years how long from start to finish.
Annette LaFrance: I've been in pain for a lot longer than that, but I've been taking you know my doctor as long as it wasn't scheduled to
Annette LaFrance: You know she was willing to try. So we tried different you know like cyclo Ben Sopron and stuff like that baclofen Gabba Penton
Annette LaFrance: Even Tramadol
Annette LaFrance: But at some point, the pain got really, really bad like I'd leave meetings to go sit in an empty conference room and cry because that was in Maine.
Annette LaFrance: And I'm like, I don't know, I can't live like this. And that's why she's like, well, I can't prescribe like we don't prescribe anything
Annette LaFrance: That's not, that's like scheduled to or are they, I don't think, I don't think many doctors are used to dealing with pain. I don't know. I'm not an expert, but
Annette LaFrance: That's when they referred me. Um, but that started the referral happen in when I was on
Annette LaFrance: IV antibiotics. So I was doing three hours of infusions a day at home.
Annette LaFrance: The line. Yeah. For the line.
Line.
tracy jackson: Yeah. And when was the last time you remember never having insane anywhere.
Annette LaFrance: Um,
Annette LaFrance: That would have to be before the Lyme disease. Yeah, I was fine.
Annette LaFrance: Like after the Lyme disease happen. I was in pain, but at first I didn't know what was going on. I was just like, I must be getting old.
Annette LaFrance: And but in 2017 I was not feeling so bad. I was going to pull out these four times a week. And, you know, things were good. And then the line came back.
Annette LaFrance: I started getting sick and that's when I ended up on the Ivy's because I had another thing called Mycoplasma pneumoniae came back really high.
Annette LaFrance: And so that's, I ended up on the IV antibiotics and I was on them for almost a year. And that, I think, you know, destroyed my destroyed my mental state and
Annette LaFrance: Just destroyed my energy
Annette LaFrance: And my pain really and the doctor said, well, it's die off from all the bugs dying off.
Annette LaFrance: But I was just in a lot of pain.
tracy jackson: Lately, what is the most disabling thumb that you have
Annette LaFrance: Um, I think it's muscular pain. I'll be it'll just like my muscles will seize up and it will be a lot of pain and I'll have a hard time walking
Annette LaFrance: But as long as I take the pain medications.
Annette LaFrance: I'm okay.
Annette LaFrance: I still have a lot of back pain, but this thing where the muscles just like the seas up and they get so tender.
Annette LaFrance: And I'll get my husband to run like a, you know, one of those fascia blaster tools.
Annette LaFrance: And just like rubbing my know my thighs and on my muscles and it's just, it's all really tender and it's just really painful and and our I'll take like a hot bath or an infrared sauna and I've got like all my different tricks up my sleeve to try to
tracy jackson: Manage it
tracy jackson: So there is a sort of bell curve of all the things you've tried since you've been diagnosed, you know, the things that are
tracy jackson: more helpful than most. And then the things that are terrible. Don't want to do them again. So it sounds like infrared sauna heat
tracy jackson: Special work are pretty helpful and kind of things in your toolbox. How about, um, any, any more on that side and then anything that's like forget it tried that. Not working.
Annette LaFrance: Um,
Annette LaFrance: Well, I also lost some weight because that doesn't help that was helpful for my lower back.
Annette LaFrance: I go to the chiropractor. The thing with the chiropractor is kind of improves. But as soon as I stopped going
Annette LaFrance: It'll get bad. And he said, I have. They didn't x ray and they said, I have like a twisted pelvis like this. And so, that helps. Um, but yeah, when I stopped going it just comes back. So that's frustrating because just temporary and it's expensive.
Annette LaFrance: And yeah, so I've got my sauna and the magnesium baths that helps taking magnesium
Annette LaFrance: I we changed the mattresses on the bed and that helped a lot too.
tracy jackson: So I know that you've been given diagnosis of Lyme disease and some other things with the pelvis.
tracy jackson: I'm guessing a host of other sort of sick labels that they, you know, put on your in your, in your mind, and what do you believe is sort of going on in your body. What do you think are the things that are contributing to your pain.
Um,
Annette LaFrance: It's hard to tell.
Annette LaFrance: I mean, I've had, I had a they did a bone scan on me and they said I was fine. The bones were fine. It was just all this pain like a lot of muscular pain and I was always blaming it on getting old, or well you don't do enough exercise or, um,
Annette LaFrance: It's, it's hard to tell. Like, I've had a lot of trauma. My life too. So, you know, I'm sure that some of it has to do with that. Mom, I am I would be
Annette LaFrance: Not surprised at all that there are some but you know I've been. I was in therapy for a while.
Annette LaFrance: It helped
Annette LaFrance: Me. Remember I you know I can't say it. It had a direct impact on pain but it helped
Annette LaFrance: Me, I was definitely not in as much pain as I am right now like and that's my main pain and just no energy
Annette LaFrance: But I can't say it's hard because
Annette LaFrance: That's a side effect of the medicine is just, I felt so tired all the time, so I can't say that. Like, I don't believe I have Lyme disease anymore. I don't believe that at all. So, um, I don't see why you should be in this much pain.
Annette LaFrance: That doesn't make sense to me.
tracy jackson: What, if anything, have any of your
tracy jackson: Providers have you read any explanation about how pain works in the body, or how emotions factor into pain that makes any sense for you. Anybody explained anything to
Know,
tracy jackson: Is that something you would be interested in me working through with you.
tracy jackson: And
tracy jackson: The global sense
tracy jackson: Any
tracy jackson: Sensation or signal coming from your environment. Okay, whether that's what you see here, taste, feel in your body. It all has to be processed in the brain so that you know what to do about it. Right.
tracy jackson: So the first stop.
tracy jackson: For any sensation or signal coming into the body is a part of your brain called the amygdala. Have you heard of the amygdala before
Annette LaFrance: Yes.
tracy jackson: So the Omega essentially has one
tracy jackson: It's also sometimes called the lizard brain or the bunny brain, but the all all things have it all mammals have it.
tracy jackson: In the whole job of this part of the brain is to answer the question. Am I safe in the world. And it's a it's a binary. It's an on off switch, like a computer in it. It's like zero or one. And if the answer to that question, for whatever reason, is no.
tracy jackson: It essentially begins to activate your fighter flight system and it's not that simple. Obviously, but you know when you're on fight or flight, what happens is
tracy jackson: It's like there's a bear in the in your okay so your muscles are going to be tight, you know, ready to fight your, your volume on your pain sensitivity is going to be turned up. So if the bear swipes and you're asleep. You'll feel, you know, you can feel it.
tracy jackson: You know, the air combat so heightened sensitivity didn't normally non painful stimuli, insomnia, anxiety, right, appropriate responses. If your brain does not feel safety.
tracy jackson: You know,
tracy jackson: A common thing I get is that, yeah. But, you know,
tracy jackson: You start to explain this. And you've, you know, particularly women who've had pain for long enough in our system say oh yeah I'm getting geared up for this. It's all in your head.
tracy jackson: BS. But in reality, if you have like to
tracy jackson: Let's say you and your husband are in two separate tense and bear comes in and bites off both of your left feet, you know, your left foot, and his left foot, but the bear is only in one 10th.
tracy jackson: The response is going to be very different to the to the same physical insult right you both have an amputated for the bear is a bear.
tracy jackson: In the environment and the brain is going to process that whatever it releases very differently depending on the environment. So
tracy jackson: For most people, they have had their amputated foot treated ad nauseum in our system right nerve block it nerve pain medicine to it, physical therapy, it do it out the wazoo right
tracy jackson: And we don't do a very good job of addressing what's in the environment or if we do, it's kind of like, I don't want to hear about it, you know, go to the psychiatrist or psychologist, whatever, right, in reality, when you have a signal whatever a signal that
tracy jackson: A lack of safety signal beacon going off in your brain all day every day for multiple years and it changes the way that your nerves actually fire in your brain. It changes the pathways, the connections, the brains are quite plastic they change all the time. So just like with your trauma.
tracy jackson: Without I don't even need to know any of the details, but in those times of trauma. I'm assuming there was a very real perceived threat to your safety.
Annette LaFrance: Yeah.
Annette LaFrance: I am. My husband was very abusive to me right
tracy jackson: So that you can't even sleep or think or what or how you act like all that kind of thing. Certainly factors into your brain sense of safety and then what happens is the snowball the vicious mobile right so then the thoughts start to happened in the ruminating talks.
tracy jackson: Over and over, then your Lyme disease, your immune system is compromised. You're more susceptible to something like Lyme disease Lyme disease goes away. But those brain pathways are still
tracy jackson: wired to protect you and this is the part I want you to remember if you don't remember anything else that I say this whole time. Our whole system.
tracy jackson: Is set up to make you feel like you are broken that something is wrong with you, you know that you have all these diagnoses and all these things, your body is your enemy, your immune systems, no good, you know, all these things, blah, blah. It's not true. This is exactly what a
tracy jackson: healthy brain does in terms of physical and emotional stress your body is doing exactly what it feels like it needs to do to keep you safe.
tracy jackson: Yeah. And we know this from military you know people in the military that have had PTSD, for instance, and a lot of people went off and joined the military because of very crappy childhoods. Right. So, you know, there's a lot of
tracy jackson: It's true, you know, not always, but PTSD people that tend to much rapidly develop
tracy jackson: Post traumatic stress syndrome, depression, anxiety, all those sorts of things.
tracy jackson: are also the ones whose brains are more likely to be able to snowball in the other direction. It just shows you have a lot of neuroplasticity in your brain.
tracy jackson: And so when you tell me some parts of your story and of course I don't know your story. Nobody knows your story, your husband's kids know about you know your story, better than anything you have all the wisdom that really
tracy jackson: You need as long as I think there's a roadmap for you know how to interpret what's going on. But when you say therapy made it a little bit better.
tracy jackson: It's helping recreate a sense of safety. A lot of things you do in therapy focus in the moment. Use your eyes. What you smell what you put in your mouth. What you here to tell your body that the bear has left the tent. Right.
tracy jackson: You know, to change the patterns of behavior patterns of thought and the behaviors related to that thought so that your brain.
tracy jackson: Since all for one instead of a zero into the code in that moment, and you know, there may be still a background of pain and trauma and anxiety going and going going 100 times in an hour.
tracy jackson: And maybe when you first start only two signals of safety that you can change the ratio. And when you change the ratio, the brain starts to catch on and everything will start to doubt stay on again.
tracy jackson: It does happen. It just takes tiny little repetitive inconsistent.
tracy jackson: Input right. It does not mean that
tracy jackson: You haven't had trauma.
You don't have
tracy jackson: Physical thing, it's just
tracy jackson: Learning to become more functional and let your brain have a break.
tracy jackson: From the, from the fight or flight, right. And what also happens is that fighter flight is adrenal fatigue. Right. You cannot be on fighter flight your whole life, your body will force you into the cave.
tracy jackson: And I have the similar things it or insomnia before chronic fatigue depression.
tracy jackson: Name, you know, all these things that happen at a cig like get away from the trigger you know move away from the bear.
Annette LaFrance: Right. Yeah, I am.
Annette LaFrance: So,
Annette LaFrance: I'm originally from Canada and
Annette LaFrance: I moved here for work and it was a great opportunity for me.
Annette LaFrance: This was in 2011 and
Annette LaFrance: But when my ex husband found out he said, I'm going to make you pay for this and he dragged me up and down through the court system and
Annette LaFrance: He
Annette LaFrance: Anyway, I
Annette LaFrance: Won't go into great detail. But we had like the psychological evaluation done with my kids and
Annette LaFrance: And the evaluators said that he was actively alienating my children against me. So, you know, I've been suffering for years in this dynamic where I have the other parent just constantly telling my kids that I'm no good. And I hate them. And so, um,
Annette LaFrance: And
Annette LaFrance: So I
Annette LaFrance: And so the evaluator, the legal expert said that my for my daughter was too late, she was already fully alienated and she was too old. By then to have anyone tell her where she should be or what she should do.
Annette LaFrance: And she was also abusive towards me. So that was one thing, but with my son, which was my youngest child.
Annette LaFrance: The psychological psychiatry or whatever, said he should be sent with his mother because his father is just going to continue alienating him and and
Annette LaFrance: So, but in the end, the judge said, Well, you know, we don't know what it's like in the US and, you know, we don't know that it's bad or whatever. And so he left shared custody.
Annette LaFrance: But that my husband, my ex husband had the him for like during the school year. And then he spent like when whenever he was not in school, you would be here and
Annette LaFrance: My
Annette LaFrance: And then the psychiatrists when he left the courthouse. He was really upset because he said the other guy all he's going to see is a he won.
Annette LaFrance: You know, even though the judge said if I hear anything else about you doing anything. You're going to lose all custody and he just like gave a lecture for
Annette LaFrance: Half an hour in court, but all he saw was I one, so then that precipitated he started hammering me like every little thing he tried to drag me back to court, until at one point.
Annette LaFrance: The judge said you're going to pay for her court fees because you keep dragging her in for things that you should be able to sort out yourselves. So, and I cost me like oh over $120,000 like ruined my retirement funds and and
Annette LaFrance: So, um, and I still have a good relationship with my son, but my daughter. I have almost no relationship with um and
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, so
Annette LaFrance: That's been a huge source of trauma for me.
Annette LaFrance: And
Annette LaFrance: I
Annette LaFrance: I can't get rid of that.
Right.
tracy jackson: And I think part of
That
tracy jackson: Really vulnerable for you to share that
tracy jackson: In Part of what
tracy jackson: I hope that as a relationship grows every time.
tracy jackson: Part of the work is actually
Annette LaFrance: I can't fix it or
tracy jackson: Change it.
tracy jackson: You know you can't fit you.
tracy jackson: can't fix it or change it. And the idea is to witness it like you have been doing with authenticity and to recognize
tracy jackson: What parts of it that we can modify what can work.
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, that's the thing it you know I am.
Annette LaFrance: I've kind of any even at one point, because I had, you know, my mother is a narcissist. So that's how
Annette LaFrance: I can of worms.
Annette LaFrance: And then, of course, I ended up marrying a narcissist and divorcing. And finally, so I actually stopped dating for almost 10 years because I'm like, I have to undo these patterns.
Annette LaFrance: After that, that I met my husband who's like not a narcissist and you know things a lot different. But even with her at one point. She was like, just get over it, you know, she was really and
Annette LaFrance: And our she'd be like, you need therapy. You can't let go and she'd be really nasty. And last year, I stopped talking to her for at least six months I was just like, I'm done with you. I'm like, Have a nice life. I am done.
tracy jackson: Very important.
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, and she just like you know my whole life has just like manipulation and gas lighting and I'm just like, I'm done. Have a nice life. I don't care that you're 72 just, you know, I have to end during those six months I was just like, calm.
tracy jackson: It's like my life.
Annette LaFrance: Is so quiet. It was really nice.
tracy jackson: I mean, I'm glad that. Yeah, it sounds like you have amazing amount of insight in that, and I hope my SS station that I can't think to just come across as a lack of empathy. It's
Annette LaFrance: No I we are that
tracy jackson: Yeah, it's some, like you said, learning boundaries about the things that you can't change that she's been working on already very clear, you've done the work through the years.
tracy jackson: And traumas important because if there are in particularly trauma that
tracy jackson: Trauma doesn't always good linear. So when you really have. I don't know. Have you ever had a panic attack.
Annette LaFrance: Oh, yeah.
Annette LaFrance: I've been yeah since my early 20s. I've been having well do you know I haven't had them for a long time now, but I used to have them almost every day. Yeah.
tracy jackson: You know when that happens, it's like, so your lizard brain here which records. That's where other traumas recording the amygdala. And then, you know, the way you think about it in the ideal world where you're doing a mindfulness exercise.
tracy jackson: Then you know you can think he just thought come in and you put them on the cloud and all the wonderful
tracy jackson: And things really build up and you know the idea of like flip your lid. When you're sort of cognitive rational thinking brain goes offline and you're just being run by fight or flight.
tracy jackson: You don't have good spatial memory and organization, right, like the parts of your brain that are supposed to record things so that you can make sense of them so completely offline that
tracy jackson: People when they have panic attacks so rub their hands or rub their size or do something because until you can feel where your body is in space again you just see
tracy jackson: You're somewhere else, right, you know. And so during that time period. There are a lot of things your eyes, ears, nose, mouth, they're still recording all the
tracy jackson: All of the environmental keys during that time. And then sometimes you can just be having a perfectly normal day
tracy jackson: And you wouldn't know that when you're having a panic attack or when you're having a traumatic experience that let's say there was a dog barking by a person in the yellow shirt right
tracy jackson: And so you're having a perfectly good day and all of a sudden you're on fight or flight again and you don't know why. And it's because your brain has recorded something
tracy jackson: That felt during a time of safety and it's there sort of buried in your subconscious where it comes out in your dreams or in unexpected times and so
tracy jackson: When I say you can't change the the the trauma or the fact that you had it.
tracy jackson: Or in some cases when it's triggered. There are some therapies. I'm not sure if you've done any of them. But we do offer a lot of them at bright heart health, whether it's em Dr or brain spotting or
tracy jackson: Some kinds of therapies where that desensitization type work where it doesn't. It's scary at first because you're kind of leaning in to uncomfortable experience and not everybody is ready to do that and I don't
tracy jackson: I don't have an opinion you know in terms of your readiness to do that. I just tell you that it's there because sometimes
tracy jackson: The trauma work is the most powerful work not just how to communicate and deal with set boundaries and all that stuff. They talk about and talk therapy.
tracy jackson: That stuff is really about recognizing when those triggers are going to come up
tracy jackson: Noticing the box really signal that shows getting ready to sort of get out of control and then figuring out tools to nip it in the bud, because that's where you can
tracy jackson: Reach have a moat more powerful impact on the sort of retraining process for safety. So that's one thing that we can work on long term at bright heart if it seems like something that you
tracy jackson: That you feel ready ready
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, like I said earlier, I am
Annette LaFrance: I do think there's a part of this. That's all that accumulated trauma.
Annette LaFrance: And but I've never had anyone
Annette LaFrance: Talk to me about that or
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, they were just focused on the like the physical pain and and correlating it to some type of illness and and saying, well, there's your problem. And if you fix it. You'll it'll go away and it doesn't
tracy jackson: And I think that's it for, and it makes it so frustrating. And I think I'm a sort of person that if I understand how it works. You know something makes sense then I know what I need to do. Yeah, tackle it.
So I hope that
tracy jackson: educating people
tracy jackson: You know you or the group about these things. I won't know your story, but you may hear something and think, oh, well, that makes sense. And maybe that's something that I can pursue. There's always a possibility. I talk to you one on one again about those things.
tracy jackson: But in our first visit. I just like to give a general overview. So you kind of
tracy jackson: Understand how it all works together. You know, so that we know which. Where does where to start, because there's no right or wrong place to start, and
tracy jackson: And then, what is your way has been has been your experience with things like like movement. You mentioned polities you've done in the past, whether there's other sorts of movement or stretching these
Um,
Annette LaFrance: I mean, I
Annette LaFrance: I pretty much stopped exercising when I started when they put the pic line in
Annette LaFrance: And I started the treatments and then also during that time I had to blood clots and ended up getting caused by the pic line. So that was another I had pain medicine for that as well. That was really painful but
Annette LaFrance: I used to really enjoy that. And I did yoga all so for a few years and
Annette LaFrance: And I wanted to
Annette LaFrance: Get back a head even hired a personal trainer. This was
Annette LaFrance: Last summer,
Annette LaFrance: To try to build up my muscles. I figured maybe that would help with the pain. If I could build up my muscle mass and and have been better physical shape that it would help with the pain.
Annette LaFrance: And I started but then after a few weeks, that's when I decided to wean off the pain pills and then I was just in so much pain all the time. I couldn't go back and exercise and when I was just
Annette LaFrance: Just moving around like I'd be hobbling around everywhere and
Annette LaFrance: And I'm stubborn so i just i wean myself completely off the all the long term Oxycodone and then like I did a good amount of the short term down and then at one point it was just like I was in so much pain. I had no interest in anything just terrible.
tracy jackson: Now, your body has quit when you have had all that external opioid your body quits making
Yeah.
tracy jackson: Internal endorphins and it takes a while.
tracy jackson: Even on the Suboxone it is you're taking Suboxone now is that correct
Annette LaFrance: Um, yeah, I had, um, they put me on the smallest dose, but I had a really bad reaction to it. It was too much for me. So I they're
Annette LaFrance: They're supposed to put me to send in a prescription for Bell Bell Bucca and
Annette LaFrance: By don't. I think they're doing the prove the insurance stuff. But right now I'm cutting them up in eight pieces. Some taking eighth an eighth of a strip twice a day. That's, that's what I'm on right now.
tracy jackson: Is it is it something that you feel like maybe at least the peak of the pain or controlled enough that you might be able to reconsider incorporating some gentle movement at some point.
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, it's some I don't have as much pain because it lasts longer. So
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, I think just right now.
Annette LaFrance: I'm like, not quite at my Goldilocks dose.
Annette LaFrance: Because I've been cutting them up in pieces. So sometimes I feel like I'm over medicated and then other times.
Annette LaFrance: And not enough. I'm in pain. So I think once that's and I did tell my husband, like I want to go back to polities and then we thought of joining a gym together and doing you know strength training together and and just being
Annette LaFrance: That he could help me.
Annette LaFrance: Be motivated
tracy jackson: And then send them to gym is not an option. At this point in the in the world right it's racing. However, you know, there are some things just some suggestions.
tracy jackson: I became a yoga instructor, not a single patient I've ever seen in my practice.
tracy jackson: Is doing downward dogs or planks, or even some of the polities move and and I did look up all of the data on yoga right of
tracy jackson: research paper about it. Whole thing and it turns out it doesn't matter what kind of yoga. You do. And there's not any kind of specific pose.
tracy jackson: That Allison tell people if they want to try to get into it, just start with cherry yoga or even bed yoga. I mean, you can Google, YouTube a lot of these yoga websites have free stuff and just start really gently with something that
tracy jackson: That just combined a little breathing and movement and you don't have to do an hour long polarities class for a while, you know, just the littler that tinier
tracy jackson: Start the more likely you are to stick with it and and so that was the sort of the
tracy jackson: Two did yeah I
Annette LaFrance: Know I'm that you can do.
Annette LaFrance: Definitely open to
That
Annette LaFrance: I was telling my husband. The other day I was like, I need to stretch. I just feel like I'm just cramped up and I brought the foam roller out and brought it down the living room. And yeah, and I'm just trying to find some ways that I can just not, you know, deal with it.
Annette LaFrance: Without taking medication.
tracy jackson: Yeah, and we will do some of this stuff in the group to like I occasionally I'll do like a 20 minute periods of class, there will be a mindfulness exercise together.
tracy jackson: Something just to give an example instead just talking about it, you know, just kind of doing it. And then if it feels good, then it's, you know, have a resource that that you guys can go and try
tracy jackson: How about your weight. Have you ever made any dietary modifications to try to improve your pain.
Annette LaFrance: Well, we did. We went on a low carb diet.
Annette LaFrance: At the beginning of the year and I lost almost 20 pounds so that i mean it losing weight, definitely, you know, feeling lighter helps in general just, you know, feeling healthier and everything and it helped my lower back as well.
Annette LaFrance: It didn't feel like I don't know if it helped it yeah I guess it helped my lower back some somewhat, but I guess it just makes me feel healthier in general. Okay.
tracy jackson: The found something that seems to work for you there.
tracy jackson: And how about any kind of mindfulness meditation kind of practice.
Annette LaFrance: Um, I used to be into that for a while and it does help. I guess it's just getting back into it. Um, but I did get some books out
Annette LaFrance: I mean, I think I have one here.
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, you
tracy jackson: Know your book in my yeah
tracy jackson: Yeah paperweight
Annette LaFrance: So I got it out last week while we were we're redoing our storage areas. And so I had boxes of books that I had never unpacked and so I found that in there. And then, like, all this is I really should get back into this. So,
tracy jackson: You've already been thinking, you know, you've already been thinking about a lot of this stuff. So you're already taking steps, you know, you're
tracy jackson: demonstrating a lot of resilience. There's a lot of positives prognostic things in your history, you know, even though you've been through a whole lot. Your social support, you know, the fact you have a job, you know, something that you're doing every day you
tracy jackson: And and have a history of doing and trying and seeing success little bits of success in the past with things and so
tracy jackson: I guess for me and what I can offers just a little bit of accountability, you know, just in terms of
tracy jackson: Typically, what I do is if you're seeing once a month that bright heart health.
tracy jackson: There's a provider who will write your bill BUCA or your buprenorphine product for you and you tend to group so much with that provider.
tracy jackson: Just so that if there any medication questions at all about that or anything else. It's all in one place and there's not any confusion about it.
tracy jackson: That may change them with the with the current a virus and more people going to telemedicine. I may end up taking on some more prescribing
tracy jackson: Things, but typically this is unusual for me. I'm not always in the same spot. I just happened to be under martial law right now, so I can't leave for the next three months or whatever.
tracy jackson: But I will. But then the other two weeks of the month you would be in one of my pain grits.
tracy jackson: And so those groups. We typically if you need a refill or something. We asked at the beginning. If there's a message that we need to pass on. But you typically would
tracy jackson: Discuss, that and the other groups and in our group, we just start out, do some mindfulness. I asked if there's any topic. Anybody wants to cover, whether it's sleep nutrition mind gut connection.
tracy jackson: communication patterns you know anything. If there's something somebody wants to discuss and you can derail completely and go down that or I normally have something prepared will where I'll explain.
tracy jackson: Why it's important for pain, what the sciences, how, you know, do a little practice and then how we might work to implement it.
tracy jackson: And so we do that twice a month. And I've been doing it for almost a year with bright heart. Some of the people have been in the groups for a long time.
tracy jackson: We're probably starting new groups as we go along. But in general, I try to work them so you don't have. They don't have to build on one another.
tracy jackson: So if that's something they're not required for you to be enrolled at bright heart. But if that's something that you feel like you
tracy jackson: Would be interested in doing. You can get you enrolled in that. And like I said, at any point if there any other specific questions that you have, you have a pain player, you get an
tracy jackson: Opinion from another doctor, you don't understand you need you need surgery for something. What do you do with your medicine, all those things that I can help you with
Annette LaFrance: Okay, yeah, I do have a breast reduction coming up when everything opens again, they were hopefully that would help with upper back pain.
Annette LaFrance: Uh huh. Um, but I did talk to. I had my pre op appointment and I did tell the surgeon about the Suboxone. Although now I'll be on Bell Bell BUCA so
Annette LaFrance: But he said that they've had other patients on Suboxone and the anesthesiologist would because I asked him if he could do like a nerve block or something.
Annette LaFrance: So he said he has ways of putting in extra local anesthesia like around the breast incisions and he said that that normally helps a lot. Yeah, okay.
tracy jackson: So good about that.
tracy jackson: I feel good about the surgeon anesthesia team you
tracy jackson: Have for that surgery if it happens. I don't feel good about you having it anytime soon. Wait till
tracy jackson: Although yeah away from hospitals. If you can
Annette LaFrance: Yeah, no, they had moved me to the April 30 but asked her what came out yesterday. I need to call them back or write to them and say, because we're we're under shelter in place now until April 30 so
tracy jackson: Right. And, you know, one suggestion that I might have, you know, particular for upper back, I would Google and I've done this myself. I know there are a lot. And that was probably pull up the first 10 of them, but Google
tracy jackson: Chair yoga for the neck and upper back. Okay, and just see try three days a week, because the data would suggest if you do a total of 100 minutes in a week.
tracy jackson: So you can do that one long class or split it up 10 minutes a day or whatever and just see because you know maybe your neck neck and upper back pain gets a lot better. And then you could even put off because if you can put off surgery.
tracy jackson: Great. Right.
tracy jackson: And there may be other reasons that you want breast reduction or whatever. But if it's just for the neck and back pain, maybe use this time to just see how much improvement. You can get with moving around. And then, you know, help you decide how how critical it is and
Annette LaFrance: Are there any yoga teacher instructors, or that you would recommend. So I find that I have a few DVDs at home, but I find they're all really advanced
Annette LaFrance: Even if it says
Annette LaFrance: For beginners I find
Annette LaFrance: Them, they get into it near I'm like this is going too fast.
tracy jackson: So I'm not sure I'm financial situation, the best web the best website at them for yoga is called yoga download com. Okay, there are quite a few free classes they have something like
tracy jackson: 200 instructors and you can also search in the thing by length of time intensity
tracy jackson: Oh, I will you sweat. Do you need props. So you can kind of almost put that search algorithms in and come up for them to sounds like a plug. I get paid nothing for this. This is not anything
tracy jackson: That I work within to put together a user for chronic pain series. So I went through their whole catalog and fam ones that I thought would be appropriate for my patients.
tracy jackson: And I believe that it's free on their site, but it's not. They might have a monthly subscription service. I don't know. But even then, even if it's not the course that I put together.
tracy jackson: There you can still search by area of the body, neck and upper back, gentle 10 to 20 minutes or something and try try finding somebody there that you like.
Annette LaFrance: Okay, I'll do that. Take it out.
tracy jackson: Yeah, yoga download.com
tracy jackson: Okay, thank you. All right. And that was really nice to meet you. I'm going to send an email to the care coordinator Jamie and asked her to try to get you scheduled for one of my groups. And I think the next ones are next week. So maybe I'll see you then.
Annette LaFrance: Okay, great. Thank you. Sorry.
tracy jackson: Okay. You're welcome. Bye bye.